Cannulated Prolactin Test

What is a Cannulated Prolactin Test?
A test to measure the prolactin hormones in your blood before and after 2 hours of rest.
Why would I need this procedure?
Your doctor has recommended that you have a cannulated prolactin test to check if there is a
true over secretion of prolactin hormone in your blood or just stress induced.
Prolactin is a hormone that is mainly secreted by our pituitary gland (often called the master
gland, a pea size gland situated in a bony hollow just behind the nose bridge). This is often
called the “milk hormone” because it stimulates milk production after birth, but it is also
produced in men in smaller quantities. It can also be raised during stress.
What are the symptoms that have led to me having this procedure?
You might be experiencing the following symptoms: loss of periods (female), infertility, low or
lack of libido, weight gain, bloated stomach, lethargy/exhaustion, falling asleep during the day,
headaches, milk/fluid excreting from nipples when not pregnant (males can experience this too).
What are the alternatives?
There are no alternatives to this test.
What are the expected benefits of having the test?
This test will help your doctor find out if you have hyperprolactinaemia (raised levels of the
hormone prolactin in the blood stream) and prolactinoma (a prolactin secreting growth on the
pituitary gland).
What are the potential risks?
A cannula (tiny plastic tube) will be inserted into a vein in your arm or hand using a needle. The
cannulation process is similar to that of a blood test.
Associated risks with cannulation or a blood test may include:
• multiple punctures to locate veins
• bleeding from puncture site
• bruising
• haematoma (blood build up under the skin)
• fainting or feeling lightheaded
• infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
• phlebitis (inflammation of the vein)
Keeping pressure on the puncture site for a few minutes after the needle is removed will help to
reduce bruising

Preparation for your test.
You do not need to fast for this test (unless advised by your clinician). You can take your usual
medications on the day of the test (unless advised not to do so). If in doubt, please contact your
endocrine nurse specialist on the number provided below.
Females
If you are using an oral contraceptive pill, or oral HRT you may need to stop them for six weeks
prior to your test as they can affect results (please discuss with the endocrine specialist nurse
for further guidance). If you are using an HRT patch you may continue to do so.
If you are stopping the contraceptive pill you must use and alternative contraceptive to
avoid pregnancy.
All patients
If you are taking any anti-depressants, anti-anxiety, sleeping tablets and/or anti-sickness
medications, it is important you tell your endocrine specialist nurse before you come for your
appointment as these may need to be stopped.
What happens during the test?
It is important that you arrive for your appointment time as stated in your appointment letter. You
will be asked to empty your bladder prior to the start of the test. A cannula (a small plastic tube)
will be inserted in your vein and a blood sample will be taken to check your baseline prolactin
hormone. Afterwards, you will be asked to rest in bed for 2 hours. After 2 hours of rest, another
blood sample will be taken to measure your prolactin hormone. This time, the test is finished
and you will be allowed to move and be discharged if you feel well.

Will I have an anaesthetic?
No
How will I feel afterwards?
This test should not affect your normal activities of daily living.
How long will I be in hospital?
You will be in the hospital for approximately 3 hours.
What should I do when I go home?
In most cases, patients resume their normal activities.
How soon will I be able to resume normal activities?
In most cases, this test should not affect your normal activities.
Will I have to come back to hospital?
Depending on the test results, further tests may be required.

When can I return to work?
There are no work restrictions involved for this test as in most cases, patients resume their
normal activities after the test
Consent
Although you consent for this test, you may at any time withdraw such consent. Please discuss
this with your endocrine team.
Sources of information
For queries concerning this leaflet or your procedure please contact:
Endocrine Team at ESHT
Telephone: 0300 131 5910 - EDGH and CQ
Opening Hours: 8am – 4pm (Monday – Friday except Bank Holidays)
Important information
This patient information is for guidance purposes only and is not provided to replace
professional clinical advice from a qualified practitioner
Your comments
We are always interested to hear your views about our leaflets. If you have any comments,
please contact the Patient Experience Team – Tel: 0300 131 4731 or by email at:
esh-tr.patientexperience@nhs.net
Hand hygiene
The trust is committed to maintaining a clean, safe environment. Hand hygiene is very important
in controlling infection. Alcohol gel is widely available at the patient bedside for staff use and at
the entrance of each clinical area for visitors to clean their hands before and after entering.