How does the diabetes team check for
Neuropathy?
Once a year at your Annual Review appointment, once
you are over the age of twelve, we will examine your feet
carefully to see that there is no damage. We also check
the nerve and muscle reflexes in your ankles and knees
and we will check you can feel vibration normally. These
painless checks are usually conducted during annual
review/clinic visit

How can I help reduce healthcare associated infections?
Infection control is important to the well-being of our patients
and for that reason we have infection control procedures in place.
Keeping your hands clean is an effective way of preventing the
spread of infections. We ask that you, and anyone visiting you,
use the hand sanitiser available at the entrance to every ward
before coming in to or after leaving the ward. In some situations
hands may need to be washed at the sink using soap and water
rather than using the hand sanitiser. Staff will let you know if this
is the case.

Diabetes Complications Explained
All of these complications can sound very frightening. However,
it is important that you know about them, because the risk of
getting any or all of these complications can be reduced by
keeping good/tight blood glucose control and having a healthy
lifestyle.
An HbA1c less than 58 mmol/mol (7.5%) over the years reduces
the risks almost to zero. An HbA1c over 75 mmol/mol (9%)
dramatically increase’s the risks, but every 11 mmol/mol (1%)
you can bring your HbA1c down will cut the risks by about 10%.

1. Kidney Disease (Nephropathy)
The kidneys are the organs that filter and clean the blood and
remove any waste products by making urine. They also regulate
the amount of fluid and various salts in the body, helping to
control blood pressure. Kidney disease (or Nephropathy to give
it its proper name) is when the kidneys start to fail.
As with other diabetes complications, kidney disease is caused
by damage to small blood vessels. This damage can cause the
vessels to become leaky or, in some cases, to stop working,
making the kidneys work less efficiently.
The longer you have diabetes, the greater the risk of kidney
disease, and the risk increases as HbA1c increases. People
with HbA1c levels less than 58 mmol/mol (7.5%) are unlikely to
get kidney disease, but those with HbA1c levels above 75
mmol/mol (9%) have about a 1 in 3 risk. 

Atherosclerosis is caused by:
 smoking
 high blood pressure
 being overweight
 not taking exercise
 raised cholesterol
 having diabetes
How does the diabetes team check for CVD?
We will check the lipid (fat) levels in your blood, and we will
check your blood pressure once a year at your Annual Review.
We will also check the circulation in your feet once a year once
you reach the age of twelve. If needed, you can be prescribed
tablets to lower your blood pressure and to lower your lipid
levels. There are a few symptoms of CVD so the key is to have
regular checks.

Nerve Damage (Neuropathy)
There are several types of Neuropathy but the commonest
one that affects people with diabetes is known as ‘Sensory
neuropathy’ which affects your legs and feet. This means
that the nerves in your feet may not feel (sense) pain and
discomfort as well as previously.

Eye Disease (Diabetic Retinopathy)
Diabetic Retinopathy is a diabetes complication affecting the
retina. The retina is the layer at the back of the eye, which is
sensitive to light. To be able to see, light must be able to pass to
the retina. It passes through the cornea (clear covering in front
of the eye), lens and vitreous (a clear, jelly-like substance that
gives support to the back of the eye). The focused light or
images are then carried to the brain by the optic nerve.
The longer a person has diabetes the greater the likelihood of
developing Diabetic Retinopathy.
Long term Diabetes causes the capillaries (tiny blood vessels)
in the retina to become blocked. This may then lead to leakage
in the central retina or result in the growth of new vessels, which
may bleed and fill the eye with blood (a vitreous haemorrhage).
The risk increases as HbA1c increases. People with HbA1c
levels less than 58 mmol/mol (7.5%) are unlikely to get
Retinopathy, but those with HbA1c levels above 75 mmol/mol
(9%) have about a 1 in 3 risk.

The risk of getting Eye Disease can be reduced by:
 keeping blood glucose levels as near normal as possible
(between 4 and 7 mmol/l before meals, and less than 10 mmol/l
two hours after food)
 keeping blood pressure controlled.
 not smoking


The symptoms of neuropathy are:
 tingling in your toes and feet and sometimes in your lower
leg
 numbness, or loss of feeling, in your feet
 pain, which can be quite severe, in both feet and/or up one
or both legs
 a burning sensation, ‘pins and needles’ and shooting pains
 any contact with the skin, even bedclothes, can be
uncomfortable
If you experience any of these symptoms, speak to your
diabetes nurse or doctor.
The main problem is that Neuropathy leads to loss of feeling
in feet and legs, which means you may not notice minor
injuries, such as cuts, blisters and burns. These can lead to
ulcers, which cause more hospital admissions in adults than
any other diabetes related complication. If you get severe
pain in your feet, this tends to improve with time, but is very
difficult to treat.


Looking after your feet is absolutely vital:
 keeping blood glucose levels as near normal as possible
 wear shoes that fit well
 cut toenails straight across
 dry in between toes after swimming , bathing etc
 if your feet get wet change into dry socks as soon as
possible
if you get athletes foot or verrucas go to your GP or ask to
see a Podiatrist
Never go barefoot

The risk of getting Kidney Disease can be
reduced by:
 keeping blood glucose levels as near normal as possible
(between 4 and 7 mmol/l before meals, and less than 10
mmol/l two hours after food)
 keeping blood pressure controlled.
 not smoking

How does the diabetes team check for kidney
disease?
Kidney disease can be a very serious condition, which is why
it is very important to detect it at its earliest stage.
Everyone with diabetes will have an annual review. Once you
reach eleven years of age,or you have had your diabetes for
longer than five years your urine will be tested for protein.
This test looks for tiny particles of protein in the urine, called
'microalbuminuria'. These appear during the first stages of
kidney disease, as the kidneys become 'leaky' and lose
protein. At this stage kidney disease can often be treated
successfully, so this test is very important. Sometimes,
during puberty the test may become positive, and then the
microalbuminuria may settle down. We don’t know whether
these people are likely to go on to develop kidney disease in
later life


disease?
If eye disease is caught early it can be treated, so it is very
important to look for it regularly once you reach the age of
twelve. Children are now included in the County Diabetes Eye
Screening Programme. Once a year you will have an
appointment, if you are over 12, and have a photograph taken
of the back of your eye. This is done by putting some drops
into the eye to enlarge the pupils, so the ophthalmologist has
a clear view of the back of the eyes. You will then have your
head and chin supported (as in other eye examinations) and
the camera is then brought close to the eye and a picture is
taken. There is normally a flash with this, which will be very
bright and can sometimes cause some temporary discomfort.
3. Cardiovascular Disease (CVD)
People with diabetes are 2 to 4 times more likely to develop
CVD than those without Diabetes, making it the most
common diabetes related complication. Higher lipid(fat) levels
in the blood can be related to higher HbA1c’s and further
increases the risk
The term CVD applies to all diseases of the heart or blood
vessels, including:
 high blood pressure
 heart attack
 stroke
 narrowing or blocking of the arteries (major blood vessels)
CVD is caused by atherosclerosis, which is where blood
vessels become blocked with fatty deposits. In the brain this
can cause a stroke ;and in the blood vessels supplying the
heart it can cause a heart attack. It can also cause narrowing
of the arteries to the legs, resulting in poor blood supply to the
feet.
